arXiv:cond-mat/9512119v1 15 Dec 1995

Two Lane Traﬃc Simulations
using
Cellular Automata
LANL Report No. LA-UR 95-4367

M. Rickerta,b , K. Nagelb , M. Schreckenbergc , A. Latourd
a Center for Parallel Computing, Universität zu Köln, 50923 Köln, Germany,

mr@zpr.uni-koeln.de
b Los Alamos National Laboratory, TSA-DO/SA MS M997, Los Alamos NM 87545,

USA, rickert@tsasa.lanl.gov and kai@lanl.gov
c Theoretische Physik/FB 10, Gerhard-Mercator-Universität Duisburg,

47048 Duisburg, Germany, schreck@rs1.comphys.uni-duisburg.de
d Institut für Theoretische Physik, Universität zu Köln, 50923 Köln,

Germany, a2015846@smail.rrz.uni-koeln.de

November 26, 2024
Abstract
We examine a simple two lane cellular automaton based upon the single lane CA introduced by Nagel and Schreckenberg. We point out important parameters deﬁning the shape of the fundamental diagram. Moreover
we investigate the importance of stochastic elements with respect to real
life traﬃc.

1

Introduction

In recent times cellular automata based simulations of trac ow have gained
considerable importance. By extending the range of rules from nearest neighbours to a range of 5 grid sites and introducing 6 discrete velocities 0 . . . 5 Nagel
and Schreckenberg [1] have found a striking resemblance of simulation and realistic trac behaviour. For vmax = 1 Schadschneider and Schreckenberg have
1

2

1

INTRODUCTION

found an analytic solution [2]. For higher vmax , these analytic approaches lead
to good approximations for the average behavior [3]. Further analytic results can
be found in [4]. Nagel [5] pointed out the strong connections between particle
hopping models and uid-dynamical approaches for trac ow.
Much less is known about modelling of multi-lane trac. This statement is not
only true for particle hopping models for trac ow, but for trac ow theory
in general. Queueing models are not truly multilane, but emulate multiple lanes
by switching the order of vehicles on one lane whenever a passing would have
occurred in reality [7]. Fluid-dynamical models incorporate multi-lane trac
only by parametrization [8, 9], although sometimes based on kinetic theory [10].
Traditional car-following theory (see [11]) by and large never dealt with multilane trac. Modern microscopic trac simulation models (e.g. [12, 13, 14, 15])
obviously handle multi-lane trac by necessity. Cremer and coworkers [16, 17]
even treat multi-lane trac in the context of cellular automata models. Yet, all
these papers approach the problem by using heuristic rules of human behavior,
without checking which of these rules exactly cause which kind of behavior. In
validations then (e.g. [15]), it often enough turns out that certain features of the
model are not realistic; and because of the heuristic approach it is dicult to
decide which rules have to be changed or added in order to correct the problem.
For that reason, a more systematic approach seems justied. Our approach here
is to search for minimal sets of rules which reproduce certain macroscopic facts.
The advantage is that relations between rules and macroscopic behavior can
be more easily identied; and as a welcome side-eect one also obtains higher
computational speed.
We again choose particle hopping models as starting point for this investigation because their highly discrete nature reduces the number of free parameters
even further. It is clear that a similar analysis could be applied to continuous
microscopic models, hopefully beneting from the results obtained in this and
following papers.
Nagatani examined a two lane system with completely deterministic rules and
vmax = 1 [18, 19], where cars either move forward or change lanes. A very
unrealistic feature of this model are states where blocks of several cars oscillate
between lanes without moving forward at all. He corrected this by introducing
randomness into the lane changing [20]. Latour has developed the two lane
model which served as the basis for the one discussed here [22]. Rickert used a
more elaborate rule set for two lane trac which reproduced the phenomenon
of increased ow with an imposed speed limit [23].

3

2

Single Lane Model

For the convenience of the reader we would like to outline the single lane model.
The system consists of a one dimensional grid of L sites with periodic boundary
conditions. A site can either be empty, or occupied by a vehicle of velocity
zero to vmax . The velocity is equivalent to the number of sites that a vehicle
advances in one update — provided that there are no obstacles ahead. Vehicles
move only in one direction. The index i denotes the number of a vehicle, x(i) its
position, v(i) its current velocity, vd (i) its maximum speed1 , pred(i) the number
of the preceding2 vehicle, gap(i) := x(pred(i)) − x(i) − 1 the width of the gap
to the predecessor. At the beginning of each time step the rules are applied to
all vehicles simultaneously (parallel update, in contrast to sequential updates
which yield slightly dierent results). Then the vehicles are advanced according
to their new velocities.
• IF v(i) = vd (i) THEN v(i) := v(i) + 1

(S1)

• IF v(i) > gap(i) THEN v(i) := gap(i)

(S2)

• IF v(i) > 0 AND rand < pd (i) THEN v(i) := v(i) − 1

(S3)

S1 represents a linear acceleration until the vehicle has reached its maximum
velocity vd . S2 ensures that vehicles having predecessors in their way slow down
in order not to run into them. In S3 a random generator is used to decelerate
a vehicle with a certain probability modelling erratic driver behaviour. The
free–ow average velocity is vmax − pd (for pd = 1).

3

A Generic Two Lane Model

The single lane model is not capable of modelling realistic trac mainly for one
reason: a realistic eet is usually composed of vehicles types having dierent
desired velocities. Introducing such dierent vehicle types in the single lane
model only results in platooning with slow vehicles being followed by faster
ones and the average velocity reduced to the free–ow velocity of the slowest
vehicle [21, 24].
We introduce a two lane model3 consisting of two parallel single lane models with
periodic boundary conditions and four additional rules dening the exchange of
vehicles between the lanes. The update step is split into two sub-steps:
1 Note that in the original model all vehicles had the same maximum velocity v
max . We
now allow for dierent desired velocities vd (i) to include an inhomogeneous eet
2 A precedes B in this context means that A is followed by B
3 Note that the results presented here still concentrate on a single desired velocity only.
The eects of dierent desired velocities will be investigated in future papers.

4

3

A GENERIC TWO LANE MODEL

1. Check the exchange of vehicles between the two lanes according to the
new rule set. Vehicles are only moved sideways. They do not advance.
Note that in reality this sub-step regarded by itself seems unfeasible since
vehicles are usually incapable of purely transversal motion. Only together
with the second sub-step our update rules make physically sense.
This rst sub-step is implemented as strict parallel update with each vehicle making its decision based upon the conguration at the beginning of
the time step.
2. Perform independent single lane updates on both lanes according to the
single lane update rules. In this second sub-step the resulting conguration
of the rst sub-step is used.
The most important parameters of the two lane model are as follows:
Symmetry: The rule set dening the lane changing of vehicles can be both
symmetric and asymmetric. The symmetric model is interesting for theoretical considerations whereas the the asymmetric model is more realistic.
Stochasticity: The single lane model proved that a strictly deterministic model
is not realistic: the model did not show the desired spontaneous formation of jams. In the case of the two lane model the lack of stochasticity in
combination with the parallel update results in strange behaviour of slow
platoons occupying either lane: since none of the vehicles has reached its
maximum velocity and all evaluate the other lane to be better there is
collective change sidewise which is usually reversed over and over again
until the platoon dissolves or the platoon is passed by other vehicles.
We introduce stochasticity into the two lane rule set to reduce the eective
number of lane changes and thus dissolve those platoons. The simulation
also revealed that is eect is also important in the asymmetric free–ow
case (see 4.4).
Direction of Causality: In the single lane model a vehicle only looks ahead
(= downstream = in the direction of vehicle ow) so that causality can
only travel upstream (= in the opposite direction of vehicle ow). A
reasonable lane changing rule must include a check of sites upstream in
order not to disturb the trac of the destination lane. This would result
in causality travelling downstream.
A somewhat generic starting point for modeling passing rules is the following:
(T1) You look ahead if somebody is in your way. (T2) You look on the other
lane if it is any better there. (T3) You look back on the other lane if you would
get in somebody else’s way.

5

Technically, we keep using gap(i) for the number of empty sites ahead in the
same lane, and we add the denitions of gapo (i) for the forward gap on the
other lane, and gapo,back for the backward gap on the other lane. Note that if
there is a vehicle on a neighbouring site both return -1. The generic multi-lane
model then reads as follows. A vehicle i changes to the other lane if all of the
following conditions are fullled:
• gap(i) < l (T1),
• gapo (i) > lo (T2),
• gapo,back (i) > lo,back (T3), and
• rand() < pchange (T4).
l, lo , and lo,back are the parameters which decide how far you look ahead on
your lane, ahead on the other lane, or back on the other lane, respectively.
According to the before mentioned characteristics we associate the parameters
of our rule set:
characteristic
symmetry
stochasticity
backward causality

4

yes
T1 for L→R
probc < 1
lo,back > 0

no
no T1 for L→R
probc = 1
lo,back = 0

A lane changing model

As an example, we start with l = v + 1, lo = l, lo,back = 5 = vmax , and
pchange = 1. That means that both l and lo are essentially proportional to
the velocity, whereas looking back is not: It depends mostly on the expected
velocity of other cars, not on one’s own.
In the symmetric version of this model, cars remain on their lane as long as they
don’t “see” anybody else. If they see somebody ahead on their own lane (i.e.
gap < v + 1), then they check on the other lane if they can switch lanes and do
so if possible. Afterwards, if they are satised, they remain on this lane until
they become dissatised again.
In the asymmetric version, cars always try to return to the right lane, independent of their situation on the left lane.
Space-time-plots both of the symmetric and the asymmetric version are shown
in Figs. 1 and 2. For these plots, we simulated a system with a length of 12,000
sites of which we plot 400 sites in 400 consecutive time-steps. The density is
0.09 which is slightly above the density of maximum ow (see below). Vehicles
go from left to right (spatial axis) and from top to bottom (time axis). Trac

6

4 A LANE CHANGING MODEL

jams appear as solid areas with steep positive inclination whereas free ow areas
are light and have a more shallow negative inclination. Each plot is split into
two parts: The left part containing the left lane and the right part containing
the right lane, respectively.
Note that plot 2 (left lane) gives a good impression of the great number of lane
changes through the high frequency of short vehicle life lines appearing and
disappearing: These are vehicles that temporarily leave the right lane to avoid
an obstacle. They go back to their old lane as soon as the obstacle has been
passed. It will be conrmed quantitatively that indeed the rate of lane changes
is much higher for the asymmetric model than for the symmetric model.

4.1

Simulation Setup

Before going on, we would like to describe our standard simulations set-up
for the following observations. Note that quantitative simulation results were
obtained with a much larger system than the qualitative space-time plots. We
simulated a system of length
L = 133, 333 sites ≈ 1000 km
with closed boundary conditions, i.e. trac was running in a loop. We started
with random initial conditions, i.e. N cars were randomly distributed on both
lanes around the complete loop with initial velocity v0 = 0.
Since the system is closed, the average density per lane is now xed at
ρL =

N
,
2L

where the “2” stands for the number of lanes.
The simulation was then started, 1000 time steps were executed to let the transients die out, and then the data extraction was started. The ow which is
found in the fundamental diagrams is both space and time4 averaged, i.e.
1 1 ∑∑
v(i, 5t) .
jL,T =
T L i t
L

T /5

Values for lane change frequency and ping pong lane change frequency (see
below) are obtained by the same averaging procedure except that statistics are
gathered every time step, since by denition ping pong lane changes occur in
subsequent time steps.
We usually used T = 5000, and the same procedure was repeated for each
density found in the plots. With a resolution of ∆̺ = 0.01 an average plot took
about 22 hours of computation time on a Sparc 10 workstation.
4 We gather statistics every fth time-step only, since subsequent time steps are correlated.

4.2 Flow behavior

4.2

7

Flow behavior

By comparing these models with each other and with earlier results, we make
the following observations (Fig. 3 unless otherwise noted):
(i) Both for the symmetric and the asymmetric version, maximum ow is higher
than twice the maximum ow of the single lane model (Fig. 4). Which means
that, in spite of the additional disturbances which the lane changing behavior
introduces into the trac ow, the general eects are benecial, probably by
diminishing large deviations from “good” ow patterns.
(ii) Both for the symmetric and the asymmetric version, the combined 2-lane
ow reaches a maximum at ρjmax ≈ 0.08, which is at or near a sharp bend of
the ow curve.
(iii) For the asymmetric model, ow on the left lane keeps increasing slightly
for ρ > ρjmax , but this is over-compensated by the decreasing ow on the right
lane.
(ii) and (iii) together lead one to the speculation that maximum ow in the
asymmetric case here actually is connected to a “critical” ow on the right lane
and a “sub-critical” ow on the left lane. Any addition of density beyond here
leads to occasional break-downs on the right lane and thus to a much lower
ow there. Obviously, such interpretations would have to be claried by further
investigations, and the word “critical” would have to be used with more care,
such as is pointed out in [6] for the single lane case.
(iv) For both lanes combined, the curves for symmetric and asymmetric trac
actually look fairly similar. If the above interpretation is right, this means that
the overall density of maximum ow is a fairly robust quantity, but one can
stabilize one lane at a much higher density if this density is taken from the
other lane.
(v) At very low densities in the asymmetric case, ow on the left lane, jlef t ,
only slowly builds up. This is to be expected, since at least two cars have to be
close to each other to force one of them on the left lane, leading to a mean eld
solution of jlef t (ρ) ∼ ρ2 for ρ ≈ 0.
(vi) For ρ > 0.4, ows on both lanes in the asymmetric models are fairly similar
and similar to the lane ows in the symmetric models.

4.3

Lane changing behavior

To get some further insight into the lane changing dynamics, Fig. 5 shows the
frequency of lane changing both for the asymmetric and the symmetric model.
(i) Note that in the asymmetric case there is a sharp bend in the curve, which is
not found for the symmetric case. This bend is also near ρjmax , giving further
indication that the dynamics above and below ρjmax are dierent.

8

4 A LANE CHANGING MODEL

(ii) For the symmetric case, lane changing occurs with less than half the frequency compared to the asymmetric case.
(iii) In the symmetric case, the lane changing frequency per site for small densities increases approximately quadratically up to rather high densities, whereas
the same quantity for the asymmetric model grows approximately linearly already for fairly low densities. suggests that for the symmetric case a mean eld
description of interaction, P (change) ∝ ρ2 , would be valid up to comparably
high densities. obvious that this does not work. Since the vehicles have a strong
tendency to be on the right lane, already a density of 0.04 per lane would be
a density of 0.08 if everybody were on the right lane. Yet, ρ = 0.08 is known
to be already a density of high interaction in single lane trac. Since this high
interaction tends to spread vehicles out [2, 3], each additional vehicle simply
adds its own share of lane changes, making the relation roughly linear.
(iv) The maximum number of lane changes occurs at densities much higher than
ρjmax . The lane changing probability per vehicle, however, reaches a maximum
below the critical density (Fig. 6).

4.4

Ping pong lane changes

An artifact of the so far described algorithm is easily recognizable when one
starts with all cars on the same lane, say the right one. Assuming fairly high
density, then all cars see somebody in front of them, but nobody on the left
lane. In consequence, everybody decides to change to the left lane, so that
all cars end up on the left lane. Here, they now all decide to change to the
right lane again, etc., such that these coordinated lane changes go on for a long
time (“cooperative ping-pong eect”). This eect has already been observed by
Nagatani for the much simpler two-lane model [18, 19].
One way around this is to randomize the lane changing decision [20]. The
decision rules remain the same as above, but even if rules T1 to T3 lead to a
yes, it is only accepted with probability pchange . With this fourth lane changing
rule, patterns like the above are quickly destroyed.
In order to quantify the eects of a dierent pchange , simulations with pchange =
0.5 were run. The observations can be summarized as follows:
(i) The ow-density curves are only marginally changed (Fig. 7).
(ii) The frequency of lane changes is decreased in general, but, except for ρ <
ρjmax in the asymmetric case, by much less than the factor of two which one
would naively expect (Fig. 5). That means that usually there is a dynamic
reason for the lane change, that is, if it is not done in one time step due pchange <
1, then it is re-tried in the following time step, etc.
(iii) To better quantify in how far a pchange < 1 actually changes the pattern
of vehicles changing lanes back and forth in consecutive time steps, we also

4.5 Other Parameter Combinations

9

determined the frequency of “ping pong lane changes”, where a car makes two
lane changes in two consecutive iterations. Obviously, there are left-right-left
(lrl) and right-left-right (rlr) ping pong lane changes.
Fig. 8 shows that reducing the probability to change lanes, pchange , from 1 to 1/2
has indeed a benecial eect: The number of ping pong lane changes decreases
by about a factor of ve.
Yet, for the symmetric case, the frequency of ping pong lane changes is more
than an order of magnitude lower in both cases anyway. This indicates that
in simulations starting from random initial conditions, the cooperative eect as
described further above as cooperative ping-pong eect does not really play a
role for the statistical frequency, because this eect should be the same for the
symmetric and the asymmetric model. Instead, the cause of the ping pong lane
changes in the asymmetric model is as follows: Assume just two cars on the
road, with a gap of 5 between them. With respect to velocity, both cars are
in the free driving regime, and their velocities will uctuate between 4 and 5.
Now assume that the following car has velocity 5 from the last movement. That
means that it looks 6 sites ahead, sees the other car, and changes to the left
lane. Then, assume that in the velocity update, the leading car obtains velocity
5 and the following car obtains velocity 4. Then, after the movement step, there
is now a gap of 6 between both cars, and in the lane changing step, the follower
changes back to the right lane. And this can happen over and over again in
the asymmetric model, but will not happen in the symmetric model: Once the
following car in the above situation has changed to the left lane, it will remain
there until it runs into another car on the left lane.
To investigate this second kind of ping pong lane changes we ran simulations
recording whether a ping pong lane change was made at low velocities 0 ≤ v ≤ 3
or high velocities 4 ≤ v ≤ 5. Fig. 9 shows a very distinct peak for fast ping–
pong–changes at low densities whereas slow ping–pong–changes have a lower
peak at higher densities similar to that of the symmetric case.
This gives a strong indication that most lane changes are actually caused by
the “tailgating eect” as described above, which is an artifact of the rules. It
is, though, to be expected that this behavior does not have a strong inuence
on the overall dynamics: It mostly happens in the free driving regime; as soon
as, for example, another car is nearby in the left lane, it is suppressed by the
looking back and forward on the other lane.

4.5

Other Parameter Combinations

We would like to mention two other parameter combinations. They are presented because they generate artifacts which contradict the common sense one
would apply to the phenomena of trac ow.
(i) In the rst case the lookahead is reduced to l = v instead of l = v + 1. While

10

5 DISCUSSION

this change is negligible for vehicles at higher velocities it becomes crucial to a
vehicles stopped in a jam: assuming the current velocity to be zero the vehicle
looks zero sites ahead and decides to remain in the current lane due to the non–
fullled rule T 1. This state will persist until the predecessor moves even if the
other lane is completely free! Fig. 10 shows the impact the reduced look ahead
on overall ow: for density ρ > 0.75 there is no perceptible ow in the right lane
which corresponds to a trac jam that occupies more or less the whole right
lane.
(ii) In the second case the look-back is reduced to lo,back = 0. Vehicles no
longer check whether their lane changing could have a disadvantageous eect
on the other lane which corresponds to a very egoistic driver behaviour. Fig. 11
shows ow density relationships for look-back lo,back = 5 and lo,back = 0. It
is obvious that the decrease in look-back also decreases the maximum ow at
critical densities. Moreover lo,back = 0 seems to split the curves of the symmetric
and asymmetric cases which used to be almost identical for lo,back = 5: the lack
of look-back is much more disadvantageous for asymmetric than for symmetric
rules.
In Figs. 12 and 13 we used lo,back = 0 for the symmetric and asymmetric rule
sets with one plot per lane. It is clearly visible (compare to Figs. 1 and 2)
how lo,back = 0 completely disrupts the laminar ow regime. Vehicles change
lanes without looking back; and due to the formulation of the model this does
not cause accidents, but causes the obstructed vehicles to make sudden stops.
Since these stops are caused more or less randomly, the regime becomes much
more randomly disturbed than before, somewhat reminiscent of the Asymmetric
Stochastic Exclusion Process (see [3, 5]).
As seen before the eect is even more drastic for the asymmetric rule set since
the number of lane changes is higher than in the symmetric case. In Fig. 13
with lo,back = 0 dynamics are dominated by small trac jams caused by lane
changes, while in Fig. 1 there are still some fairly laminar areas.

5

Discussion

Compared to reality (e.g. [15]), the lane change frequency in the asymmetric
models presented here is by about a factor of 10 too high. Using pchange = 0.1
would correct this number, but is dynamically not a good x: It would mean
that a driver follows a slower car in the average for 10 seconds before he decides
to change lanes. Besides, it was shown that about 90% of the lane changes in
the asymmetric models here are produced by an articial “tailgating dance”,
where a follower changes lanes back and forth when following another car. It
remains an open question in how far artifacts like this can be corrected by the
current modeling approach or if it will be necessary to, e.g., introduce memory:

11

If one remembers to just have changed lane from right to left, one will probably
stay on that lane for some time before changing back.
Another defect of the models presented in this paper is that the maximum ow
regime is most probably represented incorrectly. Both measurements (e.g. [15]
or Fig. 3.6 in [25]) or everyday observation show that real trac shows a “density
inversion” long before maximum ow, that is, more cars drive on the left lanes
than on the right lanes. This eect is more pronounced for countries with higher
speed limits. Let us denote by ρ1lane
jmax the density of maximum ow of the single
lane case. It follows for the real world two lane case that at a certain point
the left lane will have a density higher than this density ρ1lane
jmax whereas the
right lane has a density lower than ρ1lane
.
When
further
increasing
the overall
jmax
density, then the ow on the left lane will decrease whereas it still increases
on the right lane. It is unclear if the net ow here increases or decreases; but
it should become clear that instabilities here are caused by the left lane rst.
This is in contrast to the models of this paper, where the right lane reaches the
critical density rst. Work dealing with this problem is currently in progress.
Also the eect of dierent maximum velocities will be addressed in later papers.

6

Summary and conclusion

We have presented straightforward extensions of the cellular automata approach
to trac ow so that it includes two-lane trac. The basic scheme introduced
here is fairly general, essentially consisting of two rules: Look ahead in your
own lane for obstructions, and look in the other lane if there is enough space.
The ow-density relations of several realizations of this scheme have been investigated in detail; possible artifacts for certain parameter choices have been
pointed out. In general, there seem to be two important lessons to be drawn
from our investigations:
• Checking for enough space on the other lane (“look-back”) is important
if one wants to maintain the dynamics consisting of laminar trac plus
start–stop waves which is so typical for trac.
• Especially in countries with high speed limits, observations show a density
inversion near maximum ow, that is, the density is higher on the left lane
than on the right lane. This eect is not reproduced by our models (work
in progress).
Yet, in general, it seems that the approach to multi lane trac using simple
discrete models is a useful one for understanding fundamental relations between
microscopic rules and macroscopic measurements.

12

7

REFERENCES

Acknowledgements

We thank A. Bachem and C. Barrett for supporting MR’s and KN’s work as
part of the trac simulation eorts in Cologne (“Verkehrsverbund NRW”) and
Los Alamos (TRANSIMS). We also thank them, plus Ch. Gawron, T. Pfenning,
S. Rasmussen, and P. Wagner for help and discussions. Computing time on the
Parsytec GCel-3 of the Zentrum für Paralleles Rechnen Köln, on the Paragon
XP/S 5 and XP/S 10 of the Zentralinstitut für Angewandte Mathematik (ZAM)
of the Forschungszentrum Jülich and on the SGI-1 of the Regionales Rechenzentrum Köln is gratefully acknowledged. We further thank all persons in charge
of maintaining the above mentioned machines.
The work of MR and KN was supported in part by the “Graduiertenkolleg
Scientic Computing Köln/St. Augustin”.

References
[1] K. Nagel and M. Schreckenberg. J. Physique I, 2:2221 (1992).
[2] A. Schadschneider and M. Schreckenberg. Journal of Physics A, 26 (1993).
[3] M. Schreckenberg, A. Schadschneider, K. Nagel, and N. Ito, Phys. Rev. E
51, 2939 (1995).
[4] J.G. Brankov, V.B. Priezzhev, A. Schadschneider, M. Schreckenberg, The
Kasteleyn model and a cellular automaton approach to trac ow, preprint
(1995).
[5] K. Nagel, Particle hopping models and trac ow theory, Los Alamos
Unclassied Report 95:2908 (1995), Phys. Rev. E (submitted).
[6] K. Nagel and M. Paczuski. Phys. Rev. E, 51:2909 (1995).
[7] A. Alvarez, J. J. Brey, and J. M. Casado. Transpn. Res. B, 24:193–202
(1988).
[8] P. K. Munjal and L. A. Pipes. and three-lane freeways. Transpn. Res.,
5:241–255 (1971).
[9] P. K. Munjal, Yuan-Shih Hsu, and R. L. Lawrence. Transpn. Res., 5:257–
266 (1971).
[10] D. Helbing, Modeling multi-lane trac ow with queueing eects (preprint,
1995).

REFERENCES

13

[11] D. L. Gerlough and M. J. Huber, Trac Flow Theory, Special Report 165,
1975, Transportation Research Board, National Research Council, Washington, D.C.
[12] T. Benz, The microscopic trac simulator AS (Autobahn Simulator), ESM,
p. 486.
[13] FRESIM User Guide, Version 4.5 (Federal Highway Administration, US
Department of Transportation, 1994).
[14] G. D. B. Cameron and C. I. D. Duncan, PARAMICS–Parallel microscopic
simulation of road trac, J. Supercomputing
[15] M. McDonald, M.A. Brackstone, Simulation of lane usage characteristics on
3 lane motorways, Paper No. 94AT051, in: Proceedings of the 27th International Symposium on Automotive Technology and Automation (ISATA)
(Automotive Automation Ltd, Croydon, England, 1994), p. 365.
[16] M. Cremer and J. Ludwig, Mathematics and Computers in Simulation 28,
297 (1986).
[17] H. Schütt, Entwicklung und Erprobung eines sehr schnellen, bitorientierten Verkehrssimulationssystems für Straßennetze, Schriftenreihe der AG
Automatisierungstechnik TU Hamburg-Harburg No. 6 (1991).
[18] T. Nagatani. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen., 26:L781 (1993).
[19] T. Nagatani. Physica A, 202:449 (1994).
[20] T. Nagatani. J. Physical Soc. Japan, 63:52 (1994).
[21] T. Nagatani, Bunching of cars in asymmetric exclusion models for freeway
trac, Phys. Rev. E 51(N2), 922 (1995).
[22] A. Latour. Simulation von Zellularautomaten–Modellen für Mehrspurverkehr. Schriftliche Hausarbeit im Rahmen der Ersten Staatsprüfung (1993).
[23] M. Rickert. Simulation zweispurigen Verkehrsusses auf der Basis zellularer
Automaten. Master thesis, Universität zu Köln (1994).
[24] E. Ben-Naim, P. L. Krapivsky, and S. Redner, Kinetics of clustering in
trac ows, Phys. Rev. E 50(N2), 822 (1994).
[25] A.D. May, Trac ow fundamentals (Prentice Hall, Englewood Clis, NJ,
1990).

14

REFERENCES

Figure 1: symmetric, lo,back = 5, left + right lanes

Figure 2: asymmetric, lo,back = 5, left + right lanes

0.45
BOTH
LEFT
RIGHT
SYMMETRIC

0.4
0.35
0.3

flow

0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

density

Figure 3: Flow LookBack = 5, pchange = 1.0

0.5

15

REFERENCES

0.36
ASYMMETRIC
SYMMETRIC
SINGLE

0.34

0.32

flow

0.3

0.28

0.26

0.24

0.22
0.05

0.06

0.07

0.08

0.09

0.1
0.11
density

0.12

0.13

0.14

0.15

Figure 4: Comparison Single Lane to Multi Lane

0.008
ASYM C=0.5
ASYM C=1.0
SYM C=0.5
SYM C=1.0

lane changes / per site and time step

0.007
0.006
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

density

Figure 5: Simple Lane Changes LookBack = 5

0.5

16

REFERENCES

0.09
lane changes per site and timestep and density

lane changes
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3
density

0.4

0.5

0.6

Figure 6: Lane Changes Per Vehicle l = 5, pchange = 1.0

0.345
ASYM C=0.5
ASYM C=1.0
SYM C=0.5
SYM C=1.0

0.34

0.335

flow

0.33

0.325

0.32

0.315

0.31
0.07

0.08

0.09

0.1

0.11
density

0.12

0.13

0.14

Figure 7: Flow LookBack = 5, dierent pchange

0.15

17

REFERENCES

ping pong lane changes / per site and time step

0.0025
ASYM C=0.5 (L->R->L)
ASYM C=1.0 (L->R->L)
ASYM C=0.5 (R->L->R)
ASYM C=1.0 (R->L->R)
SYM C=0.5
SYM C=1.0

0.002

0.0015

0.001

0.0005

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

density

Figure 8: Ping Pong Lane Changes LookBack = 5, dierent pchange

lane changes per site and timestep

0.0025
slow R->L->R
fast R->L->R
slow L->R->L
fast L->R->L

0.002

0.0015

0.001

0.0005

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3
density

0.4

0.5

Figure 9: Slow and Fast Ping Pong Lane Changes

0.6

18

REFERENCES

Latour Model 2
0.4
Left Lane
Right Lane
Mean

0.35
0.3

flow

0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
density

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Figure 10: Flow with l = v

0.35
ASYM LB=0
ASYM LB=5
SYM LB=0
SYM LB=5

0.3

0.25

flow

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

density

Figure 11: Flow pchange = 1.0, dierent LookBack

0.5

REFERENCES

Figure 12: symmetric, lo,back = 0, left + right lanes

Figure 13: asymmetric, lo,back = 0, left + right lanes

19

